---
layout: page
title: A mental model for thinking about the impact of a digital product
permalink: /mental-model/
---

When you think about how a digital product or website creates an environmental impact, you can think of it creating it in three main ways - through the **Packets** of data it sends to users, the **Platform** the product runs on, and the **Process** used to make the product itself. In more detail:

### Packets

Unsurprisingly, it takes network infrastructure to move data from the servers you run, to a user's device. All this infrastructure needs power to run, and this power is usually generated by burning fossil fuels, although the amount of fossil fuels used to generate power varies based on the time of day and where in the world it's generated.

What's more, different kinds of infrastructure have different power demands - so transmitting the same video file over a wired connection uses a different amount to sending it wirelessly.

On top of that, different speeds of wireless connection _also_ use different amounts of power, so a relatively fast 4G connection typically uses more energy to download the same amount of data as a 3G, and a 5G connection is likely to use more still, even before we take into account their typically reduced range, meaning we'll need more of them to cover the same area.

We look at this in more detail, and the causes, along with the strategies you can take to mitigate against this in [your packets](/your-packets), borrowing ideas disciplines like web performance optimisation, accessibility, and content design.

[Jump to your packets](/your-packets)


### Platform

In addition to taking infrastructure to move data from your servers to your users, you need power to run your own servers, either directly by having your own server in a rack in a datacenter for example, or in the form of some product, like cloud computing, or software as a service offering.

In this case you can control the impact in a number of ways. The include, what kinds of computing resources you use, how electricity is generated to power these resources.

Choices you make about your product's technical architecture also affect how easily and quickly you can adjust the amount of resources you use directly.

This is covered in more detail in [your platform](/your-platform), and in here, we look at how using virtualisation, containerisation, serverless/functions-as-a-service can help, as well as other idea from the devops toolbox, as well as server-side performance optimisation.

We also cover options for running infrastructure on renewable power, and what options you have when you can't do this directly

[Jump to your platform](/your-platform)

### Process

We've established that we end up generating CO2 when we burn fossils to move bits (as in bytes) around.

We also end up emitting CO2 when we burn fossil fuels to move actual physical things around, like people, parcels, and so on, in jets and cars for business travel, and so on.

When we burn fossil fuels to keep places we work well-lit and depending where you are in the world warm or cool enough to work in.

We also end up building large amounts of resource use (and money) into our products when we decide to spend lots of time and resources working on them without researching how useful they are our users.

In here, [your process](your-process) we touch on ideas from service design, behaviour change, remote working and remote research practices, as well as agile product management.

[Jump to your process](/your-process)
